README.md, before:

[English] [**日本語**](README.ja.md)

# VeriPyLean (Prototype v0.1)

**"Human-readable Python, Machine-verifiable Lean 4."**

VeriPyLean is an experimental project that bridges the intuitive readability of Python with the mathematical rigor of Lean 4, using a shared Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).

## 🌟 Concept: "AI Writes, Math Audits"

While modern AI code generation is powerful, it carries the risk of hallucinations. VeriPyLean "translates" Python code written by humans or AI into Lean 4, using formal verification to detect logical inconsistencies before the code ever runs.

* **Python View**: The frontend for humans (and AI) to write and read logic intuitively.
* **Lean 4 View**: The backend to verify logical consistency (e.g., division by zero, type mismatches, termination) mathematically.
* **AST-First**: By managing programs as data structures (AST) rather than just text, we ensure a reliable 1-to-1 mapping between the two languages.

## 🚀 What is Working (v0.1)

The following flow is already functional in our minimal prototype:

* [x] **Arithmetic Translation**: Maps Python `+`, `-`, `*`, `//` to Lean 4 operators.
* [x] **Conditional Logic**: Recursive translation of `if-else` blocks.
* [x] **Safety Check (Heuristics)**: Detects division operations and warns if they are not guarded by a conditional check.

### Demo

**Input (Python):**

```python
if b != 0:
    return 10 // b
else:
    return 0

```

**Output (Lean 4):**

```lean
def example (b : Int) : Int :=
  if b ≠ 0 then (10 / b) else 0

```

## 🛠 Tech Stack

* **Language**: Python 3.10+
* **Parsing**: Standard `ast` module (Built-in Python parser)
* **UI**: Streamlit (For rapid prototyping)
* **Verification (Target)**: Lean 4

## 🗺 Roadmap (We Need Your Help!)

I have built the core concept and a minimal "chilly" prototype. To bring this vision to life, we need contributors who are passionate about formal methods and developer experience.

1. **Expanding AST Mapping**: Adding support for list operations, recursive functions, and custom types.
2. **Lean 4 Kernel Integration**: Feeding the generated code directly into the Lean 4 compiler to pipe error feedback back to the Python view.
3. **AI Assist**: Using LLMs to infer strict Lean types from ambiguous Python code.

## 💬 From the Creator

"Let's spend less time writing tests and more time proving correctness."
VeriPyLean started with this simple dream. It’s a small step, but I’m looking for developers who believe in a future where code is not just 'tested,' but 'proven.'

---

Commit message:

Revise README with project vision and community request
Updated the README to reflect the project's goals and community involvement.

README.md, after:

[English] [**日本語**](README.ja.md)

# VeriPyLean (Prototype v0.1)

**"Human-readable Python, Machine-verifiable Lean 4."**

VeriPyLean is an experimental project that bridges the intuitive readability of Python with the mathematical rigor of Lean 4, using a shared Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).

## 🌟 Concept: "AI Writes, Math Audits"

While modern AI code generation is powerful, it carries the risk of hallucinations. VeriPyLean "translates" Python code written by humans or AI into Lean 4, using formal verification to detect logical inconsistencies before the code ever runs.

* **Python View**: The frontend for humans (and AI) to write and read logic intuitively.
* **Lean 4 View**: The backend to verify logical consistency (e.g., division by zero, type mismatches, termination) mathematically.
* **AST-First**: By managing programs as data structures (AST) rather than just text, we ensure a reliable 1-to-1 mapping between the two languages.

## 🚀 What is Working (v0.1)

The following flow is already functional in our minimal prototype:

* [x] **Arithmetic Translation**: Maps Python `+`, `-`, `*`, `//` to Lean 4 operators.
* [x] **Conditional Logic**: Recursive translation of `if-else` blocks.
* [x] **Safety Check (Heuristics)**: Detects division operations and warns if they are not guarded by a conditional check.

### Demo

**Input (Python):**

```python
if b != 0:
    return 10 // b
else:
    return 0

```

**Output (Lean 4):**

```lean
def example (b : Int) : Int :=
  if b ≠ 0 then (10 / b) else 0

```

## 🛠 Tech Stack

* **Language**: Python 3.10+
* **Parsing**: Standard `ast` module (Built-in Python parser)
* **UI**: Streamlit (For rapid prototyping)
* **Verification (Target)**: Lean 4

## 🗺 Roadmap (We Need Your Help!)

I have built the core concept and a minimal "chilly" prototype. To bring this vision to life, we need contributors who are passionate about formal methods and developer experience.

1. **Expanding AST Mapping**: Adding support for list operations, recursive functions, and custom types.
2. **Lean 4 Kernel Integration**: Feeding the generated code directly into the Lean 4 compiler to pipe error feedback back to the Python view.
3. **AI Assist**: Using LLMs to infer strict Lean types from ambiguous Python code.
---

## 🏗 The Ultimate Goal of This Project: Passing the Torch

I am convinced that the concept of bridging Python and Lean 4 will become an indispensable standard in the era of AI-driven software development. However, it is impossible for me to fully realize this grand vision with my personal implementation skills alone.

### 🕊️ A Request to the Community

* **Independent Implementations are Welcome:** I sincerely hope that "someone who knows what they’re doing" will take this idea and start a "proper implementation" as a completely separate project or repository.
* **Feel Free to Steal or Adapt the Idea:** You can use the name "VeriPyLean" or rename it entirely. My ultimate goal is to see this mechanism of "Mathematical Peer Review for AI-generated Code" become a reality and benefit the world.
* **I am Content Being the "Instigator":** I provide the vision and a minimal prototype. If you feel that you can build this better than I can, please follow that intuition. The stage is yours.
